Chapter 8
Sharpening Your Written
Communication Skills
In This Chapter
/H17075Writing courteously and clearly
/H17075Selecting corporate and executive stationery
/H17075Knowing about business correspondence
/H17075Writing invitations, thank-you notes, and announcements
/H17075Addressing business envelopes
W
ith all the spell-check, grammar-check, and letter-writing programs on
computers, you may think you no longer need to know how to write
well. Think again. Writing is still an essential skill for the professional, as you
may have discovered the day your boss returned one of your letters sprin-
kled with her red editing marks.
Think about how many letters, e-mails, memoranda, and reports you get every
week. Even if you’re not a grammar expert, you can tell that some of them are
more effective than others. Some are so disorganized that you can’t find the
point. Others are so brusque as to be a little offensive. With still others, you
look in vain for a paragraph that doesn’t have a misspelled word. By contrast,
an effective letter or report is grammatically correct and contains no spelling
errors; its tone is appropriate to its content; it’s direct without being curt; and
it gets to the point quickly and stays there.
In this chapter, I show you how to compose various types of business corre-
spondence. You also find out how to avoid some basic grammatical, stylistic,
and spelling errors; how to write in a consistent and well-organized manner;
what to have in your stationery drawer; and how to address business
envelopes. By the end of the chapter, you’ll no longer be intimidated by 
business writing. You may even have enough knowledge to become the 
office expert!
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 107

--- Page 126 ---

Communicating with Clarity 
and Courtesy
Perhaps you don’t have a strong background in grammar. Maybe you avoided
every university class that had a heavy writing component. You’re the best
technician in your division, but now you’re expected to write memoranda
and letters to all kinds of people, and you don’t have an administrative assis-
tant. Result? Your trash can is full of rejected drafts, and your temperature
rises to the boiling point every time you have to write a memo.
For all but the luckiest of us, clear writing is a skill that must be learned. Sure,
naturally great writers exist, but for the rest of us, practice — and lots of it —
is required. The trouble is that you don’t have time to practice. So you do it
on the fly, with each piece of correspondence that you write.
I have two suggestions for you. The first is to read this section carefully. The
second is to buy a dictionary, a thesaurus, and a copy of Strunk and White’s
The Elements of Style. This little book (fewer than 100 pages) is recognized as
the best primer on writing ever composed. Other good writing books are
available (and plenty of business-writing books too), but Strunk and White
provide more about writing in less space than in any other book.
With that said, it’s time for your crash course on clear and courteous busi-
ness writing. I assume that you learned elementary grammar and know the
difference between a noun and a verb, a subject and a predicate, a proper
noun and a common noun. If you don’t, consult your Strunk and White.
Writing well
Clear business writing requires a good grasp of grammar and spelling, a good
vocabulary, the desire to not be misunderstood, and ruthless self-editing.
Business writing also requires a touch of grace.
Brushing up on the basics
You’re probably starting with a good grasp of basic grammar and spelling. You
acquire a good vocabulary in only one way: by reading. To paraphrase, 
“You are what you read.” Business executives around the world recommend
that you read a lot of difficult material in diverse fields. This recommendation
is twofold: You learn new perspectives and information; and you learn new
words. Both types of learning help your writing. The intention is to be as
clear as you can be and to avoid all avoidable ambiguity. Writing requires 
an attention to detail that is not needed in conversation.
108 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 108

--- Page 127 ---

Editing is perhaps the most difficult thing to do with your own writing. After
all, you wrote it, so you don’t want to change it. But you should, because
even trained writers can always find changes to make.
Edit, edit, edit — at least three times. Before anyone else gets the chance to
hack away at your work, be your own worst critic. Eliminate the grammatical
mistakes, spelling errors, and poor style. Read the letter out loud. Can that
sentence be clearer? Make it so. Reread the letter out loud. Perhaps that
word is too aggressive. Change it. Reread the letter. This paragraph isn’t as
clear as it should be. Rework it. Reread the letter. It looks good? Give it to
someone else, and have her read it. When she can find no fault, reread it once
more. Then print it, sign it, and send it!
Adding grace
Business writing, like all professional writing, is bound by the code that per-
formance — not the person — is the subject of criticism. Focus on the topic
at hand, rather than on the person who is talking about it, even if the person
is a rude so-and-so. Here are the mistakes to avoid:
/H12012Never swear in business correspondence.
/H12012Never call people names in business correspondence.
/H12012Never make off-color remarks in business correspondence.
Courteous writing requires that your tone be moderate. Tone is a function of
word choice and sentence style. Choosing your words carefully demands a
vocabulary rich enough to have words to choose from.
Speak softly, whether in person or in writing, even to your enemies. Your
lawyers are carrying the big sticks.
Avoiding writing errors
Writing clearly requires that you eliminate the mistakes that threaten clarity.
The first mistake is thinking that writing is no more than transcribed speech.
It isn’t. When you’re talking in person or on the telephone, you can rely on
the context of conversation to fill in gaps and to compensate for being
ungrammatical. That context is absent in writing, so a good writer makes
sure that her writing is clear, grammatically correct, and to the point.
When you acknowledge that writing is different from talking, the next impor-
tant task is to eliminate the errors to which every writer is prone, which I 
discuss in the following sections.
109Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 109

--- Page 128 ---

Spelling errors
Believe it or not, spelling errors can doom business relations. You may find it
hard to believe, but clients notice when your letters aren’t proofread.
Many spelling errors are easily remedied by running your document through
your computer’s spell-check program. But beware — spell-checkers don’t
catch all the errors that can creep into a document. A trained eye is still
better than a spell-check program. Remember to always double-check the
spelling of the person’s name to whom you are writing.
Grammatical errors
Most people are bored to tears by grammar, and for good reason: It’s boring
to most people! Grammar is a necessary skill for composing effective busi-
ness letters, e-mails, and memoranda, however. Repeatedly making gram-
matical errors instantly brands you as being poorly educated and careless.
Bad grammar leaves a bad impression.
So you slept through your grade-school grammar classes; your major in col-
lege required that you take only multiple-choice exams; and in graduate
school, everyone was wowed by your fabulous technical expertise. Now you
sweat bullets every time you have to compose a letter. Not to worry! The fol-
lowing sections note some of the most common grammatical errors and how
to correct them.
Subject/verb agreement
If the subject of the sentence is singular, so is the verb; if the subject is plural,
so is the verb. This rule applies even if other words intervene between the
subject and the verb.
Mistake: The job description — a full-time shipper in a variety of small-
business settings — are not detailed enough.
Better: The job description — a full-time shipper in a variety of small-business
settings — is not detailed enough.
The subject is the job description, not the business settings.
Subjects such as everyone, everybody, neither, nobody, and someone should
be treated as singular.
Mistake: Everyone has their own idea.
Better: Everyone has his or her own idea. Everyone has an idea. We all have
our own ideas.
110 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 110

--- Page 129 ---

Sentence fragments
A sentence is a complete thought that must have a subject and a predicate
phrase, including a verb. Sentences that lack subjects or predicates are 
sentence fragments.
Mistake: We are unwilling to take action. While we acknowledge your concerns.
Better: We are unwilling to take action, even though we acknowledge your
concerns.
Run-on sentences
Run-on sentences include too much for a single sentence. Breaking one long
sentence into several shorter sentences is a quick and easy fix.
Mistake: Mr. Weaver informed us that his Tonka truck was irreparable but
that he didn’t want to trade it for a similar toy, instead he wanted to get a
cash refund so that he could buy his son a different toy which we disagreed
with and so refused his suggestion.
Better: Mr. Weaver informed us that his Tonka truck was irreparable. However,
he didn’t want to trade it for a similar toy, preferring to get a cash refund so
that he could buy his son a different toy. We disagreed with Mr. Weaver and
refused to comply with his demand.
Dangling modifiers
Modifiers are sentence clauses that modify or affect the subject of the sen-
tence. Modifiers dangle when what they modify is unclear. The results are
often quite funny. The following was written by a man describing an ad 
campaign being considered by his company:
Mistake: Numerous times, I sat in my living room and watched June Cleaver
vacuum and dust while wearing a dress, high heels, and pearls.
The clause “while wearing a dress, high heels, and pearls” is meant to modify
“June Cleaver.” However, it actually modifies the author!
Better: Numerous times, I sat in my living room and watched June Cleaver
vacuum and dust while she wore a dress, high heels, and pearls.
Punctuation errors
Punctuation errors are among the most common writing errors. They make
your correspondence look unprofessional. Here, then, is a brief refresher
course on punctuation.
111Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 111

--- Page 130 ---

Commas
The comma marks a pause, sets off parenthetical material, separates main
clauses in a compound sentence, or follows introductory expressions.
Mistake: If you’re going to buy a camera you should get a flash.
Better: If you are going to buy a camera, you should get a flash.
Periods
The period ends a sentence.
Mistake: Please consider our proposal, we think you will agree that our 
service has overwhelming advantages.
Better: Please consider our proposal. We think you will agree that our service
has overwhelming advantages.
Semicolons
The semicolon marks the end of a thought to which the next thought is inti-
mately linked, or punctuates lists that are longer than three items.
Mistake: When using our product, care is required, without proper care, all
warranties are null and void.
Better: When using our product, care is required; without proper care, all
warranties are null and void.
Colons
The colon marks the break between a sentence and a list that follows. The
colon is not used in lieu of a period, a comma, or a semicolon.
Dashes
The dash takes the place of a comma (when offsetting a parenthetical remark),
period (when the succeeding sentence has the same subject), or colon (when
the material following the dash expands on something before the dash). The
dash is more informal than any of the punctuation marks it replaces. When
used sparingly, it can be an effective tool.
Mistake: Tom who never said a mean thing about anyone admitted to think-
ing that Terry was vicious.
Better: Tom — who never said a mean thing about anyone — admitted to
thinking that Terry was vicious.
112 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 112

--- Page 131 ---

Disorganization
Because words are organized into sentences, sentences into paragraphs, and
paragraphs into the finished product, start with your sentences. Make sure
that they are grammatically correct and that they say what you want them to
say — and don’t say anything that you don’t want them to say.
Paragraphs composed of nothing but grammatically correct sentences are a
good start. But your paragraphs also need to be organized. Typically, the
most important sentence is the topic sentence, in which you identify what
will be discussed in that paragraph. The balance of the paragraph is devoted
to articulating, defending, explaining, or describing what you announce in
your topic sentence.
Mistake: There is a golf course nearby and the pumps were plugged in at the
time of the house inspection. Mr. Olson informs me that he did not mislead
you about the need for sump pumps on the property. We are not really sure
what this litigation is about. Mr. Olson put the pumps in after spring rains one
year and did not conceal this fact during the inspection.
Better: We are not sure what this litigation concerns. First, Mr. Olson did not
mislead you about the need for sump pumps on the property. Mr. Olson put
the pumps in and disclosed this at the time of the house inspection. Moreover,
they were running at the time of the inspection. Furthermore, the golf course
is clearly visible from the property.
The first paragraph meanders through events that are not obviously con-
nected. The second paragraph starts with a topic sentence that tells you
exactly what the issue is. The other sentences defend the claim made in 
the topic sentence.
Passive voice
Passive voice is easy to diagnose: When the subject of the sentence is no
longer the actor who does things, you have passive voice. Look at the 
difference between these two sentences, which “say” the same thing:
Mistake: We were told by the director that our scene would not be shot
because we were likely to be hit with rain before the afternoon was through.
Better: The director told us that the forecast for rain would probably scuttle
our shoot.
The first sentence is in passive voice; the second is in active voice. The first
sentence implies that no one is responsible, because things just happen.
113Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 113

--- Page 132 ---

Excess verbiage
Bad writers use more words than are needed. Good writers don’t; they know
what words will convey their message efficiently. You improve your writing
immediately by eliminating verbiage. Verbiage is like a jungle: Too much lush-
ness means you can’t see the sky.
Mistake: Due to the fact that any and all persons who had relations in con-
nection with the reorganization of the hospital have experienced the move
that human resources has had to make to the west wing owing to their down-
sizing, it is perhaps to be expected that some procedures have suffered.
Better: Human resources’ move to the west wing has caused some proce-
dural problems.
Chop! Chop! Chop! Out of the suffocating verbal vines emerges one clear 
sentence.
Surveying Corporate and 
Executive Stationery
Every corporate and executive office has a variety of stationery in its drawers.
Each type has its function. But all types should share some characteristics:
/H12012First, the paper should be of high quality. Paper for business letters
should contain some rag-cotton content — typically, about 25 percent.
When you’re at the paper store, you can determine the rag content by
looking at the box the paper comes in. You also want paper that is water-
marked. You can determine whether paper has a watermark by holding 
a piece of it up to the light; you will be able to see the watermark
embossed on the paper.
/H12012Second, the stationery should be uniform in color, weight, and letterhead
across sizes. Your company needs an identity, and one way to establish
identity is through stationery. Having one font for your letterhead and
another for your monarch sheets makes your corporate identity look
uncertain.
Here are a few more guidelines:
/H12012Don’t skimp! Stationery is an essential part of your corporate identity.
/H12012Quality usually trumps gimmicky color, shape, and design.
The following sections explain what goes in the stationery drawer.
114 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 114

--- Page 133 ---

Corporate letterhead
Letterhead should be 81⁄2 x 11 inches, with high rag content and with the fol-
lowing relevant information printed on it:
/H12012Business name
/H12012Business address
/H12012Business telephone number
/H12012Business fax number
/H12012Business e-mail address or Web page, if appropriate
Businesses that are partnerships, such as law firms and group medical prac-
tices, typically list all the partners or members on the letterhead.
Envelopes are printed with the company name and address.
Plain sheets of paper
Plain sheets should be 81⁄2 x 11 inches and of the same quality as corporate
letterhead. This paper is for letters longer than one page. (Second and sub-
sequent pages are not presented on letterhead.)
Monarch paper
This type of paper should be 71⁄4 x 101⁄2 inches, with high rag content. The sheets
are used for personal business letters and have the following information
printed on them:
/H12012Person’s name, but not the company’s name
/H12012Business address
If monarch sheets are used as corporate letterhead (as consultants, physi-
cians, and attorneys sometimes do), include the business name.
Envelopes are printed with the person’s name and business address.
115Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 115

--- Page 134 ---

Correspondence cards
These small (typically, 41⁄2-x-61⁄2-inch), nonfoldable cards are used for personal
messages, announcements, and thank-you notes. They have the following
information only:
/H12012Person’s name, not business name
/H12012Business address
Envelopes are printed with the person’s name and business address.
You may also use a fold-over card of the same size. These cards are some-
times called informal and may have a logo on the front.
Business cards
Business cards generally are 31⁄2 x 2 inches, although other sizes are increas-
ingly used in certain businesses. You present the business card to other people
at business functions. The card should contain the following information:
/H12012Person’s name and title
/H12012Business name
/H12012Business address
/H12012Business telephone number
/H12012Business e-mail address
/H12012Business fax number
/H12012Business Web-page address
Your company logo may be incorporated into the design of the business 
card. You may also include a brief description or motto of your business.
Although some people prefer to leave the back of the card blank, you may
print additional information about your company on the reverse side.
Writing Common Types of 
Business Correspondence
A letter is still the single most important form of communication in business.
It is less ambiguous than a meeting simply because no one has to rely on
memory to know what occurred; there, in black and white, is what you said.
116 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 116

--- Page 135 ---

For that reason, important business decisions are formalized in letters. In the
following sections, I explain how to write a proper business letter and another
common kind of correspondence: the memorandum.
Business letters
Most business letters are written with the intention of getting the reader to
respond in some way. Given that goal, your writing should be efficient, clear,
error-free, friendly, and pertinent.
When composing business letters, keep the following pointers in mind:
/H12012Use high-quality paper with at least 25 percent cotton rag content. (I
describe different types of business stationery earlier in this chapter.)
/H12012Never send a letter written in anger unless you’ve waited 24 hours to
review it.
/H12012Plan your correspondence before writing it. Know what you want to say
and in what order you want to say it.
/H12012Compose your correspondence after planning it. Use direct, active lan-
guage; vary your sentence structure; adopt a moderate, friendly tone;
and give clear directions.
/H12012Revise the letter to include any new information.
/H12012Edit the letter for spelling, grammar, style, tone, and content.
/H12012Edit again.
Each time you reread the letter, it is recommended that you focus on one
aspect. Do not attempt to look for more than one or two elements when you
reread letters. Instead, reread letters several times, focusing first only on
grammar, then on spelling and missing or incorrect words (that a spell-
checker won’t catch), and finally on tone, content, and style.
The form of a business letter is standardized. All business letters have the 
following elements:
/H12012Dateline: Three to six lines beneath the letterhead, flush left or right.
The dateline contains the month (fully spelled out), day, and year.
/H12012Reference line: One or two lines below the dateline, flush left, and
repeated on each additional page. The reference line contains case or
file numbers or policy numbers.
/H12012Recipient address: Three to six lines below the dateline, flush left. The
recipient address is composed of:
• Addressee’s courtesy title and full name:Courtesy titles in busi-
ness are Mr., Ms, and Dr. Spell names out completely.
117Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 117

--- Page 136 ---

• Addressee’s business title:The title appears on the line below the
name.
• Business name: This text appears on the line below the business
title. Spell it exactly as it appears on the company’s letterhead. 
If the letterhead abbreviates Company as Co., you do too.
• Street address: This address appears on the line below the busi-
ness name. Spelling numbers out isn’t necessary unless confusion
would result otherwise; using “1745 26th Street” is just fine.
• City, State, Zip: When typing the state name on letterhead, the
entire word is to be spelled out, such as California or Pennsylvania.
It is not technically correct to use the U.S. Postal Service two-letter
code — for example, CA or PA — on the letterhead. It is properly
used on the envelope to expedite the processing of your letter for
mailing.
/H12012Greeting or salutation: One or two lines below the last line of the recipi-
ent’s address. Usually, the salutation is “Dear Ms (Mr., Dr.),” followed by a
colon. If you use first names in person, you may do so in your salutation.
/H12012Body: Starts one line below the greeting. The body of the letter contains
whatever you have to say. Be polite and courteous, but don’t be a wind-
bag. (Pay attention to the tips I provide earlier in this chapter.)
/H12012Complimentary close and signature: Two lines below the last line of the
body of the letter, flush left or centered. All the following closes are
appropriate in business letters when you don’t know the addressee:
Yours truly, Very truly yours, Yours very truly, Sincerely, Yours sincerely,
Sincerely yours.
If you know the addressee by her first name, you can use any of the fol-
lowing: All the best, Best wishes, All best wishes, Regards, Best regards,
Kindest regards
Immediately below your complimentary close, you hand-write your sig-
nature. Use your full name if you don’t know the addressee; use your
first name only if you’re on a first-name basis with that person.
Immediately below your handwritten signature, you type your signature,
along with whatever complimentary and academic/professional degrees
and ratings you like to see following your name.
/H12012Final notations: Two lines below your typed signature. If, for example,
the letter is typed by someone other than you, that person’s initials
appear here. If you are enclosing something with the letter, you may
type the notation enclosure or encl. If you are sending copies of the letter
to other people, you may type cc:, followed by the alphabetically listed
names of those receiving the letter.
Check out an example of an appropriate business letter in Figure 8-1.
118 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 118

--- Page 137 ---

April 30, 2008    
Mr. John Lockhart
President
JSKL Marketing Ltd.
949 Park Avenue, Suite 900
Sacramento, California 95605
Dear Mr. Lockhart:
 
I would like to take this opportunity to introduce myself as your Green Technical Systems’ 
Training Manager and welcome you as a valued customer.
GTS has developed a highly innovative and exciting training course, which I have been 
providing to our customers for more than eight years. I have enclosed our latest brochure 
outlining all class modules and a background of my training experience.
The courses are very comprehensive and interactive and will help your employees expand 
their knowledge of GTS professional applications. Our goal is to give attendees as much 
product and software education as possible in a manner that will allow them to become 
productive immediately. 
Other key benefits include the following:  
  Classes are held at the convenience of our customers.
  The training will allow JSKL employees to ask specific questions related  
  to their job responsibilities while still covering the core curriculum.
  The training will improve and increase productivity and job   
  a ccountability.
  The course curriculum is developed and budgeted specifically   
  for each customer at the time the product is installed. 
I will be contacting you in a few days to schedule a visit to your office to discuss course 
details and training dates. However, if you need to get in touch with me beforehand, please 
call me at 1.888.555.1212. We value the comments of our customers and we hope you will 
share your thoughts with us.
Thank you for your business. We are sure you will find our products, service, and training 
course highly satisfactory. I look forward to meeting you and the JSKL Marketing staff. 
Sincerely,
Marjorie Baker
Marjorie Baker
Training Manager
Enclosures: (2) GTS Training Course Brochure & Bio
Figure 8-1:
A proper
business
letter.
119Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 119

--- Page 138 ---

Memoranda
Memorandum is singular; memoranda is plural. If your Latin is weak, try using
memo or memos. Memos are written communications within companies or
within units of companies. Memos typically make announcements, discuss
procedures, report on company activities, and disseminate employee infor-
mation. They’re informal and public. If you have something confidential to
communicate, don’t do it in a memo.
The tone of memos usually is informal and friendly. Although you don’t need
to be curt, officious, or patronizing, a certain succinctness is acceptable.
Structure the memo so that the most important information comes in the
first paragraph and that subsequent paragraphs spell out what is discussed
in the first paragraph.
All memos are structured similarly. They have the following elements:
/H12012An addressee: Flush left, in capital letters, near the top of the page
/H12012The sender: Flush left, in caps, immediately below the addressee
/H12012Date: Flush left, in caps, immediately below the sender’s name
/H12012Subject: Flush left, in caps, immediately below the date
/H12012Suitable paper: White bond, either note size or standard to fit most desk
in-baskets.
Figure 8-2 is an example of a properly structured memo.
Some people appear to think that the world can never have enough memos,
and they stuff others’ mailboxes to overflowing with them. Remember that
everyone is busy and has a job to do. Other people appear to think that
memos, because they are public, are effective management tools. Although
memos are effective for direction and suggestion, criticism and praise are
best given in person. If you must use a memo to criticize, make sure that the
criticism is not of the person, but of the performance.
Even though the majority of information today is conveyed via e-mail, it’s
important that the style of using an attached memo (document) is still 
an important style of writing in 21st-century business. Sending hard copy
memos may be a thing of the past, but it’s still important to use the correct
style when sending a memo in the body of an e-mail. When you’re conveying
larger amounts of information, it is better to send the information as a prop-
erly formatted memo attachment than to send it all via an e-mail blast. This
way the message can contain the correct headings, numbered items, and
other formatted information that an e-mail does not allow as easily.
120 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 120

--- Page 139 ---

Handling Formal Correspondence
At some point, you will have the opportunity to host social business events,
respond to an invitation, thank a colleague for a gift or an event, or announce
something for the business.
Business and social invitations
Include every bit of information that is required for the invitee to decide
whether to accept or decline the invitation. Make sure that everyone who
should be invited is invited, which requires consulting all the department
heads and other relevant people about their guest lists.
Although casual invitations are often extended by telephone, more formal or
larger events call for written invitations. Whether your invitation is in person
or in writing, here’s a checklist to guarantee that you include what you need
to (see Figure 8-3 for an example):
/H12012Who is the function’s host?Having an executive name herself as host
gives the invitee a person to contact and thank.
Memorandum
TO: GTS Sales Staff
FROM:  Karen Moore
CC: Mr . John Sakazaki
DATE:  April 18, 2008
SUBJECT:  Customer Presentation
The JSKL Marketing presentation you prepared last week to showcase our new 
product line was exceptional!
Your enthusiasm, sales strategy, and product knowledge were impressive and 
certainly sealed the deal with Mr. Lockhart!
Thank you for your outstanding work and dedication. Bonus checks will be 
distributed next week. 
My sincere congratulations to all of you!
Figure 8-2:
A proper
memo.
121Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 121

--- Page 140 ---

/H12012What is the function? The nature of the event should be explicit.
/H12012Where is the function? The place where the function will be held and the
phone number of the host are listed near the bottom of the invitation.
/H12012When is the function? The time when the function will begin is listed. If
the event is a cocktail party, the time when the party will end is also
listed.
/H12012Will food be provided? If the event is a sit-down dinner, the invitation
should say dinner. Cocktails in an invitation means that hors d’oeuvres
will be provided, but no more. Buffet supper means that the event will
feature something more substantial than hors d’oeuvres but less sub-
stantial than dinner. Cocktail buffet means that the event will feature
something more substantial than hors d’oeuvres but less substantial
than a buffet supper.
/H12012Will dancing be involved? If the event will include dancing, say so.
/H12012Will sports be involved? If the event will feature volleyball, basketball,
swimming, hang-gliding, or golf, say so.
/H12012What is the expected dress? The style of dress should be specified.
Formal or Black Tie means tuxedos for men, while women have a couple
of options: either a long gown or a short, dressy cocktail dress. Evening
Formal means a dark suit, a white shirt, and a tie for men; women can
wear a short cocktail dress or a dressy pantsuit. Business Dress means a
regular suit and tie for men, while women can wear a dress, a skirt with 
a blouse, or nice slacks with a top or a sweater. Informal means blue
blazer and tie; and Casual Dress means business casual attire, such as a
nice colored shirt and slacks for men, and a nice dress or pants outfit for
women.
/H12012How should invitees reply? The host determines how you should
respond — by e-mail, telephone, or by return reply card. If a reply 
is requested, the letters RSVP usually occur near the bottom of the 
invitation. If you see Regrets Only, that means that you do not have to
respond if you are going, but do have to respond if you are not going.
The most important thing to remember is to reply by whatever due date
was set by the host.
Thank-you notes
Thank-you notes are sent to the host within a day or two after the function.
These notes are short, gracious, and to the point. Two to three lines is a per-
fectly acceptable length; you don’t need to write several paragraphs. Thank-
you notes are not for discussing business or bringing the host up to speed
about your family life.
122 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 122

--- Page 141 ---

In honor of
Mr. John William Sakazaki
The Officers and Directors of Green Technical Systems
request the pleasure of your company
at a retirement dinner
Saturday, the fifteenth of March 
Six o’clock to nine o’clock
Restaurant Sent Sovi 
19956 State Street
Sacramento
RSVP     Business Dress
Ms. Carol Connor
19500 Capital Avenue
Sacramento, California 95605
916.555.1212
Figure 8-3:
An invitation
to a
business
event.
123Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 123

--- Page 142 ---

Thanking people for something usually follows the form in which the invita-
tion was extended. If you receive a telephone invitation, a telephone thank-
you is appropriate, although a thank-you note is a nice touch. If you receive 
a written invitation, you should write a thank-you note.
Thank-you notes are not reserved for parties and dinners. The general rule is
this: If someone goes the extra mile for you, a thank-you note is appropriate;
if the thank-you is just for day-to-day business, a verbal “Thank you” is good
enough. Thank-you notes are always appropriate for gifts you’ve received.
Use white, cream, or gray paper for a professional look; texture and weight
aren’t as important. Note cards or fold-over notes (informal) in white, cream,
or gray can also be used. You can have these engraved, embossed, or printed
with your name or monogrammed in the center of the card’s front.
When you write a thank-you note, be sure to do the following (see Figure 8-4
for a sample):
/H12012Thank the person for the gift.
/H12012Recognize the effort that went into giving the gift.
/H12012Tell the person how you will use the gift.
If you’re feeling at a loss for words in starting a thank-you note, try writing
these words: “What a [wonderful luncheon, fantastic evening at the theater,
thoughtful gift].” The rest of the note should flow from there. Try not to start
with “Thank you”; mention the event or gift, or make a general comment,
first.
Announcements
Businesses on occasion make public announcements of important events,
such as a move, a significant new hire or promotion, a meeting, or a signifi-
cant death. If you are asked to compose such an announcement (like the one
in Figure 8-5), keep three things in mind:
/H12012Keep it simple.
/H12012Get to the point immediately.
/H12012Print it on correspondence cards, not letterhead.
124 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 124

--- Page 143 ---

GREEN TECHNICAL SYSTEMS 
is pleased to announce
KAREN MOORE
has been named Chief Executive Officer
following the retirement of John Sakazaki.  
Ms. Moore will assume this position effective May 1, 2008.
Figure 8-5:
A business
announce-
ment.
April 18, 2008
 
Mr. John Lockhart
President
JSKL Marketing Ltd.
949 Park Avenue, Suite 900
Sacramento, California 95605
 
Dear Mr. Lockhart:
 
It was a pleasure speaking with you last week about our new computer product 
line. I would like to thank you for your order and faith in our company. 
 
Green Technical Systems is dedicated to providing high-quality products and 
unsurpassed service, and we hope that you will allow us to continue to serve your 
business in a way that is mutually beneficial.
Ms. Patricia Parker, the sales representative in your area, will be handling your 
account. She will be contacting you this week to schedule a follow-up visit to 
familiarize you and the JSKL Marketing staff with our product line.
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to call us at our toll-free number.
 
Thank you again for your purchase.
 
Sincerely,
Karen Moore
Karen Moore
President
cc: Ms. Patricia Parker
Figure 8-4:
A thank-
you note.
125Chapter 8: Sharpening Your Written Communication Skills
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 125

--- Page 144 ---

Addressing Envelopes for Business
First impressions are lasting impressions — especially with business corre-
spondence. Letters are mirrors that reflect your taste and character (or those
of your company). You should use printed envelopes that match your com-
pany letterhead with a printed return address. The recipient’s address should
be typed or printed by a software program.
Printed labels affixed to an envelope are not professional. Your letter could
get set aside or thrown away because the envelope looks like junk mail.
Keep these additional points in mind when you’re addressing an envelope for
a business letter or a business social event:
/H12012Include your complete return address. If you are not using printed
envelopes that match your company stationery, print your name and
company name and return address legibly in the top-left corner of the
envelope. It’s also acceptable to write the return address on the envelope
flap, although the U.S. Postal Service prefers to have it on the front. A
complete address comes in handy if your recipient wants to post a reply.
Keep the lines aligned on the left. Write the street address and suite
number (if any) on one line. Start a new line for the city, state, and zip
code. Use numerals instead of writing out numbers, and make sure that
you use the postal code abbreviation for your state — that is, NY for
New York, IL for Illinois, AZ for Arizona, and so on.
/H12012List the recipient’s formal title and address.Regardless of the informal-
ity of the letter itself, the address on the envelope should be complete.
The recipient’s name and title should go on the first line. The second
line is the street address, and the third line is the city, state (use the
postal code abbreviation with no periods), and zip code.
/H12012Neatness counts! If you address the envelope by hand, write legibly.
Take a deep breath just before you begin. If you mess up somewhere
along the line, start over on a fresh envelope. Strikeovers, ink blots,
messy erasures, and the like are signals that you don’t really care, but of
course, you do care.
You can find more valuable information about addressing business envelopes
on the U.S. Postal Service Web site: www.usps.com/businessmail101/
addressing/deliveryAddress.htm.
126 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
13_147092-ch08.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 126

--- Page 145 ---
