Chapter 9
Keeping Up with 
Electronic Etiquette
In This Chapter
/H17075Guarding information
/H17075Communicating around the clock
/H17075Displaying great etiquette on the Internet and via e-mail
/H17075Understanding the rules for high-tech gadgets
/H17075Using laptops and office equipment courteously
N
ew technology has turned business on its ear and created a whole new
set of etiquette conundrums. Yes, all this new technology saves time,
but it also contributes to the ever-more-hectic pace of life and work. In this
environment, in which everyone is trying to fit more activity into less time,
misunderstandings about etiquette are bound to arise. But the problem isn’t
technology; it’s the way technology is being used and abused.
You can easily forget good etiquette when you’re using the latest technology,
yet it isn’t too late to change your behavior by being aware of it and by being
sensible and considerate of others. (Emily Post didn’t know anything about
e-mail, but she did know that the essence of etiquette is putting other people
at ease.)
Although the information in this chapter may not be new to you, knowing the
rationale behind it is smart. No matter what, you must know how to present
yourself as a considerate professional when you’re using the latest technol-
ogy. (Be sure to review Chapter 7 for information on improving your phone
manners as well.)
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 127

--- Page 146 ---

Keeping Your Information Secure
Technology has made communication easier for you and me. It has also made
communication easier for the bad guys — those who want to steal your com-
pany’s proprietary technology, employee Social Security numbers, or other
confidential information. Yes, all this new technology sounds a little like
Mission: Impossible, but information security is part of business etiquette.
After all, what could be more impolite than letting your company’s secrets
fall into the wrong hands?
Because the character of the Internet keeps changing, and the lingo can be
confusing, the rules of common courtesy may be hard to grasp initially. Add
the fact that an online faux pas has the potential to reach millions of people
who have access to the Internet, and you may be a bit nervous about how to
act online.
Some companies ask new employees to sign a confidentiality agreement,
which states something to the effect that the employee will not share any
information he learns at the company to help another company succeed.
These agreements aren’t just formalities; they’re important, legally binding
contracts that dictate how you should conduct yourself. If you sign one, keep
a copy of it, and understand what it says.
Many large companies have specific guidelines about information storage
and security, document retention, and so on. If you’re not sure about your
company’s guidelines, ask. And don’t leave any hard drives behind the copier
or coffee machine!
Here are a few more guidelines:
/H12012If you work with vendors, don’t reveal more about internal projects than
they need to know to complete the job. (Don’t share lists of employee
names and phone numbers, for example.)
/H12012When you leave your desk for more than a minute, turn on your screen
saver, and set a password to lock it. If you’re not sure how to do this,
check with the person who set up your computer.
/H12012When you leave at night, lock up your disks and documents. Make sure
that all confidential information is inside your locked cabinet and that
any piles on the floor are just magazines and unopened mail.
/H12012If you travel with a laptop computer, don’t leave it in an unlocked confer-
ence room or sitting out in plain sight in your hotel room.
For complete details on security alerts, activities, reports, and updates, check
out the National Cyber Alert System: www.us-cert.gov. Also, the Federal
128 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 128

--- Page 147 ---

Trade Commission has created a Web site for consumers and businesses as 
a source of information about computer security and safeguarding personal
information. You can find further information by visiting the Web site:
www.ftc.gov.
Handling ’Round-the-Clock
Communications
In the old days, workers in the vast majority of professions had predictable
work hours. Most professionals worked from 8 or 9 in the morning until 5 or 6
in the afternoon, and any incomplete work waited until the next day. People
took lunch breaks every day. When Mr. Threemartini was out for the after-
noon, generally no one could reach him unless the situation was urgent. He
would return calls the next morning, when he arrived at the office to find a
stack of pink phone-message slips.
How things have changed! Now, with all the new technology — cell phones,
personal digital assistants (PDAs), and text-messaging devices, to mention
just a few — people are connected 24 hours a day!
In such an environment, everyone has to be a bit flexible in understanding
the needs and priorities of colleagues. If you’re the boss, don’t expect your 
3 a.m. e-mail to have been read before the 8 a.m. staff meeting. If you’re the
employee, be aware of your boss’s idiosyncrasies, and learn to anticipate
them (even if you’ll never love them). If you’re in either position, don’t call or
text-message someone after hours unless an emergency arises or you have
discussed the contact in advance (“Please contact me when you get those
numbers, Bob, and I’ll call you from the prime minister’s dinner party.”).
Here are a few additional guidelines:
/H12012If you’re seized by a fit of creativity in the middle of the night, read your
e-mails again the next morning before sending them. Your idea (not to
mention your level of coherence) may look different in the light of day.
/H12012Don’t practice voice-mail avoidance by returning all your calls at odd
hours. If someone has left a message for you, requesting specific infor-
mation, leaving a specific answer late at night is fine. If someone needs
to talk to you, however, don’t return the call at 10 p.m. and then insist
smugly that you have done your part. You’re not fooling anyone.
/H12012If you send an e-mail that needs an immediate response, call to alert the
recipient.
129Chapter 9: Keeping Up with Electronic Etiquette
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 129

--- Page 148 ---

Practicing Civility on the Internet
Some observers believe that the Internet has been a great democratizer
because it has made great volumes of information available to everyone 
who has access to a computer and modem. People who have never left their
hometowns can take virtual tours of the Louvre or travel anywhere in the
world by using Google Earth. But the world is made up of two kinds of
people: those who know how to use the Internet with élan and those who
don’t.
Be sure to keep these rules in mind:
/H12012First and foremost, a business Internet account is for business. Even if
everyone else seems to be doing it, resist the temptation to shop for
shoes online during that interminable conference call. Some companies
may allow you to use your Internet account for personal use during
breaks or lunch hours, but ask first.
/H12012Unless your job description requires you to participate in company blogs
and online chatting, you shouldn’t be doing these activities on company
time. If your job requires that you manage or respond to blogs and chat
rooms, make sure you use the appropriate etiquette. Most blogs and chat
rooms have rules and guidelines, so follow them! A few general tips: Use
the spell-checker, be accurate and honest, and stay on topic.
/H12012Be aware that many employers monitor employee Internet use. Find out
whether your company has an official policy on Internet use, and be
sure to follow it carefully. Wouldn’t it be embarrassing to explain that
you were fired because you were updating your MySpace page or writing
comments in an inappropriate blog on company time?
/H12012If it’s necessary in your job to navigate the Internet or intranet sites at
work, it’s important to remember that your communication is coming
from your work e-mail address. You’re bound to run into problems with
obsolete links, error messages, or outdated information. Some sites
solicit your information via Contact Us or Feedback links. Your feedback
is important, but remember that a real person will read your e-mail. Send
feedback such as “As a frequent user of your site, I find this problem
frustrating” rather than slacker-like feedback such as “Your site is lame,
and your company blows!” The ruder and less rational your feedback is,
the more likely the Webmaster will be to dismiss it as the raving of a
lunatic shut-in.
/H12012You have no excuse for viewing adult Web sites at the office, even if you
do so after hours, when you’re the only person around. Despite the
uproar about children discovering inappropriate Web content, happen-
ing upon dirty pictures by accident isn’t easy. And with the current legal
climate around sexual harassment in the workplace, most employers
have a zero-tolerance policy for this kind of behavior.
130 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 130

--- Page 149 ---

/H12012Some Internet service providers have rules and policies about online
behavior. If you’re at work and discover anything online that is inappro-
priate, that makes you feel uncomfortable, or that you believe is harass-
ment, contact your company’s IT department or the company’s Internet
service provider immediately.
Take the time to understand online lingo. Many Web sites list Internet terms
and acronyms. Knowing some of the key vocabulary will not only help you
communicate clearly, but also show that you are a savvy Internet user. For
the lowdown on Internet vocabulary, check out The Internet For Dummies,
11th Edition, by John R. Levine, Margaret Levine Young, and Carol Baroudi
(Wiley).
Figuring Out E-Mail Etiquette
A couple of years ago, e-mail surpassed postal mail as the highest-volume
carrier of messages. Its popularity has been booming ever since and shows
no signs of stopping. Though volumes have been written about the etiquette
of communicating through this new medium, many of the worst offenders
don’t seem to be listening. Are you one of them? The following sections
explain how to avoid some of the pitfalls of instantaneous communication.
Communicate clearly
The best feature of e-mail is also the worst: Communication with one or many
people, across the hall or across the world, can happen immediately. That
immediacy can be a tremendous asset when you need that kind of power. It
can also be a real problem when you use it as a substitute for thoughtful,
meaningful communication.
One problem with overusing e-mail is that your tone can easily be misunder-
stood. In person or on the phone, listeners can get visual or verbal cues, and
pick up emotions and nuances, particularly sarcasm. Even in the age of irony,
and even if you use the ubiquitous smiley, readers may miss your point. “I
heard Thursday’s staff meeting went really well!” has a completely different
meaning when it’s spoken in a sarcastic tone (the meeting didn’t go well at
all) than it does when it’s spoken in a happy, direct tone. Chances are good
that your readers will misunderstand this statement in an e-mail.
In a conversation, people often ask clarifying questions, as in this example:
“Did you send that report to Steve?”
“Steve Ferrill?”
131Chapter 9: Keeping Up with Electronic Etiquette
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 131

--- Page 150 ---

“No, Steve Peterson. He wanted me to add some information about SLAs.”
“Well, I sent it to Steve Ferrill. What’s an SLA?”
You can easily see how, in an e-mail about Steve and SLAs, both parties could
end up confused. Always reread your e-mail message for clarity before you
send it, and follow up with a phone call if you don’t get a prompt response.
Write with style
Here are a few stylistic mistakes that people make when using e-mail:
/H12012Forgetting the rules of spelling and grammar: Perhaps because of the
sheer volume of e-mails that people send, e-mail tends to be a very infor-
mal medium. Informal, however, should not mean sloppy.Watch for prob-
lems such as sentence fragments and spelling errors. If you’re not sure
about the rules of grammar, read Chapter 8, and purchase a style manual
such as The Elements of Style by William Strunk Jr. and E. B. White.
/H12012Being unprofessional: Just because you’re sending an e-mail instead of a
memo or telephone call doesn’t mean you can let your professional stan-
dards relax. Although a touch of humor in the tone of an e-mail can be
fine, make sure you preserve your professionalism. Although smileys
may be helpful in social e-mails, try to avoid using them in business.
/H12012Omitting a greeting and/or closing:Even worse is using “Hey” as a greet-
ing. Is it really that hard to type “Hi Charlene” or “Best wishes, Biff”?
/H12012Using ALL CAPITALS: Capitals are harder to read than regular text. In
addition, many people view their use as the e-mail equivalent of yelling,
so if you wouldn’t scream something in the conference room, don’t type
it in all capitals.
/H12012Using all lowercase letters: Are you e.e. cummings? If not, capitalize
proper nouns, names, and the first letter of each sentence.
/H12012Using offensive language: Though you should watch your language at
work in general, spoken expletives float away into the air. Written ones sit
there on the computer screen, maybe for longer than you want them to.
Think before you send
Some other e-mail annoyances are simply the result of taking too little time to
think. They include
/H12012Sending a message to too many people: Does everyone on your project
team need to see the details about setting up a conference room for next
Thursday? No. After you have completed the legwork with the person or
people who are really affected, you can notify others with a single message.
132 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 132

--- Page 151 ---

/H12012Using Reply All or a similar function instead of Reply to Sender: If
your manager sends out a message thanking everyone on the team for
great work on the project, don’t respond to the entire group, telling him
that it was your pleasure and that he’s a great leader.
/H12012Not double-checking the list of recipients,especially if the message says
something potentially negative: A public-relations executive received a
particularly irritating e-mail from a despised colleague. The executive
forwarded the note and her sarcastic commentary on it to a friend — 
or so she thought. In fact, she had clicked the Reply button and sent the
e-mail right back to her nemesis. Imagine her humiliation when she had
to apologize!
/H12012E-mailing someone who sits across the aisle from you: If you’re recap-
ping a meeting, e-mailing is fine. But if you have a question for discus-
sion, try the old-fashioned approach of speaking to each other.
/H12012Sending and receiving personal e-mail at work: The equipment and
Internet time belong to your company, so using them for personal 
purposes probably violates company policy. And although I know you
would never send anything potentially offensive or harassing from work,
it could be equally damaging to receive such material at work from a
friend.
Avoid venting
E-mail is a great tool for venting your spleen. Unfortunately, you shouldn’t do
it at work. Observe the following rules:
/H12012Don’t use e-mail to lambaste a colleague, and especially don’t copy
others on the message. That’s tantamount to chewing someone out in
front of a room full of his peers. Disagreements or discipline are best
handled in person or at least over the phone.
/H12012If you receive a scathing e-mail, resist the urge to write a similarly
scathing message in return. Take the high road. Offer the olive branch,
or at the very least, distract the other person by making him wonder
why you haven’t responded.
/H12012Never, ever write something in an e-mail that you wouldn’t want pub-
lished in the newspaper. Even if you send them to people you trust,
e-mails that contain sensitive, mean, or potentially embarrassing infor-
mation have a way of being forwarded beyond your original audience.
E-mail should not be a substitute for face-to-face discussions and telephone
time, and e-mailing should not go on too long. After two back-and-forth
exchanges on the same issue, it’s time to pick up the phone.
133Chapter 9: Keeping Up with Electronic Etiquette
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 133

--- Page 152 ---

Be aware that managers in e-mail-intensive companies may get 200 or more
messages per day! Take pity on them; be brief, and if you don’t get a response
when you need one, follow up by phone.
You should also return e-mail messages promptly, even if only to say, “I
received your message but won’t be able to give it my full attention until next
week.” If your e-mail program supports this feature, you should also set a
vacation auto-reply when you will be out of touch for more than a day or two.
The e-mail program will respond automatically to correspondents (usually,
only once to each person) to let them know that you’re away and not reading
e-mail.
Always remember to add the subject in the Subject line. This not only helps
the person quickly locate the e-mail at a later time, but it is also the polite
thing to do. One of the worst offenses in e-mail etiquette is how people use
the Subject line to send their entire message, leaving the text area totally
blank . . . not even an auto-signature. Although the sender may think it is only
one sentence, it is often an extremely long sentence. Regardless, it is not cor-
rect and is a sign of laziness. Subject lines are meant to be a quick reference
to what is written in the body of the e-mail.
Being Mannerly with High-Tech Gadgets
Today, many people seem to be more focused on their fancy gadgets than on
other people. Face-to-face meetings have become a low priority because
they’re constantly being interrupted by technology, and many people can’t
figure out what to do. What’s more important: the gadget or the person
you’re with?
If you don’t want to be seen as a rude person, consider the advice in the fol-
lowing sections when you use high-tech tools.
The same etiquette rules that apply to handheld devices apply to cell-phone
use. See Chapter 7 for more on this topic.
Managing text-messaging on PDAs
Be with the one you’re with! Social norms say that the person you are con-
versing with takes precedence over text-messaging on your personal digital
assistant (more commonly known as a PDA). This rule applies in business 
as well. Most businesses prefer employees not make personal calls and send
personal e-mails on company time. The same rule applies to text-messaging.
If the text message isn’t related to work, don’t do it. Or wait to respond during
134 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 134

--- Page 153 ---

your break, lunch, or after work. It is not only rude but also distracting to
check or send text messages in the presence of other people, whether socially
or for business.
Follow these additional rules for proper text-messaging:
/H12012Before using any handheld device, consider your location. Sending text
messages is acceptable in semiprivate situations, such as in the airport,
in a cab or a train, alone in a café, or waiting in line. Just don’t hold up
the line by asking the person at the counter to wait until you finish 
sending or reading a message. When dining out with others, keep your
electronic gadgets neatly tucked away at mealtime — never left sitting
on the table.
/H12012If you receive an urgent or important message in the presence of some-
one else, excuse yourself, and find a secluded corner where you can
communicate.
Listening to audio files on MP3 players
It’s best to check company policy first, however, most businesses allow their
employees to use MP3 players or other devices as long as they use a headset
or earpiece so the music or program does not disturb coworkers. Normally
this is fine in an office environment or if you work in a cubicle, or if your job
requires you to cover some background noise, such as that of a warehouse
worker. Just remember to keep the volume low. An exception applies to those
who work in the public eye, such as sales clerks or receptionists. In these
instances, listening to private selections is clearly inappropriate.
Shooting pictures and 
videos on cell phones
No longer a novelty, the camera phone has become ubiquitous. When it comes
to business, however, you should steer clear of certain things. A picture may
be worth a thousands words, for example, but think twice before you use your
cell phone to take covert shots of fellow employees or unreleased products
without approval.
Photographing or videotaping people you work with without their knowledge
or approval is not professional. Respect others’ privacy. Always ask permis-
sion before taking a photo or video of someone and never post photos to any
Internet sites unless you have a signed agreement.
135Chapter 9: Keeping Up with Electronic Etiquette
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 135

--- Page 154 ---

Using laptop computers appropriately
What possible etiquette pitfalls could surround laptop computers? Here are
some:
/H12012Some keyboards are quieter than others, but loud typing during a meet-
ing can be very distracting to your colleagues. If you’re getting the look
of death from the person sitting next to you, switch to a pen and paper.
/H12012The same rule applies to conference calls; ambient noise can drown out
speakers. Set your phone on mute unless you’re speaking so that others
won’t hear you typing.
Using Office Equipment Appropriately
The key to using and sharing office equipment is remembering that it belongs
to everyone. Here are a few tips:
/H12012If you notice that the fax machine or copier is out of paper, put in more
paper.
/H12012If the fax machine or copier is broken, either fix it (if you know how to
do so without making the problem worse) or call someone who can fix
it. Then put a sign on the equipment to let other users know the problem
has been called in.
/H12012If you need to make lots of copies, and someone else needs to make only
a few, let him go first.
/H12012Have respect for the IT folks and other people who fix your office equip-
ment and maintain computers, phones, and other office equipment by
keeping it clean. Think of how much more pleasant your job is because
of them!
136 Part II: Building Better Communication Skills 
14_147092-ch09.qxp  3/27/08  9:18 AM  Page 136

--- Page 155 ---

Part III
Behaving in the
Boardroom and
Beyond
15_147092-pp03.qxp  3/27/08  9:17 AM  Page 137

--- Page 156 ---

In this part . . .
I
put you through a real etiquette workout, reviewing
everything from meeting manners to gift-giving. I help
you shine in the boardroom by outlining proper seating
arrangements and give you details on chairing a meeting
properly. I hit the potential highs and lows of company
events and help you figure out the office-party minefield.
This part covers practical guidelines for business meals
and the importance of dining etiquette. It also talks about
the importance of taking part in company off-site activi-
ties and the etiquette challenges surrounding them.
I give you words of wisdom on surviving trade shows and
conferences, as well as tips on mingling and networking
and on the significance of representing yourself and your
company. I show you what to do if the responsibility for
planning a special event falls to you. I close with the best
ways to mark milestones with colleagues, clients, and
bosses, and appropriate gift-giving associated with those
events.
15_147092-pp03.qxp  3/27/08  9:17 AM  Page 138

--- Page 157 ---
